Spaces top level order (#3230)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/3230-spaces_top_level_order.md

# MSC3230: User defined top level spaces ordering

> Currently, Spaces as defined per [MSC1772](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772) do not define an explicit order for top level spaces. Current implementations are ordering based on the lexicographic order of the roomIds.

Reviewer: line wrap to ~120 characters please

Reviewer 2: Wrapped to 98 characters by me:
```suggestion
Currently, Spaces as defined per [MSC1772](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772)
do not define an explicit order for top level spaces. Current implementations are ordering based
on the lexicographic order of the roomIds.
```
Signed-off by: Erkin Alp Güney <erkinalp9035@gmail.com>

As requested by a lot of users, it would be very convenient to be able to re-order top level spaces.

The ordering is per user and should be persisted and synced across the user's devices.

This MSC only concerns top level space ordering as subspace ordering is defined in the space as per m.space.child event.

## Proposal

The ordering information should be stored using room [`account_data`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#id125)

Order is saved by using a new room account data of type `m.space_order`

` PUT /_matrix/client/r0/user/{userId}/rooms/{roomId}/account_data/m.space_order`

````
{
    "type": "m.space_order",
    "content": {
        "order": "..."
    }
}
````

> Where `order` is a string that will be compared using lexicographic order. Spaces with no order should appear last and be ordered using the roomID.

Reviewer 2: Treat `order` as a 256-bit number:
```suggestion
Where `order` is a string of 32 octets (256 bits) that will be compared using numerical
order. In case that is not present either, the client shall hash the room ID to a 256-bit
implementation-defined hash and use it as the fallback value of `order`.
```
Signed-off by: Erkin Alp Güney <erkinalp9035@gmail.com>

Reviewer 3: This would mean newly joined spaces are now slotted in randomly instead of at the end.

Reviewer 2: Yes, but by being fixed length, it will be far easier to keep it in a fixed position in a future binary format.

Reviewer 3: MSC1772 Spaces already use an identical lexicographic string `order` sorting field.
Your suggestion would inconsistent and code would not be re-usable around a Spaces implementation.

Order is defined as a `string` and not a `float` as in room tags, as recommanded because it was not very successful.

## Client recommendations:

After moving a space (e.g via DnD), client should limit the number of room account data update.
For example if the space is moved between two other spaces, just update the moved space order by appending a new character to the previous space order string

Re numbering (i.e change all spaces `m.space.order` account data) should be avoided as much as possible, as the updates might not be atomic for other clients and would makes spaces jump around.

## Potential issues

> Spreading the order information across all spaces account data is making order changes not atomic.

Reviewer 3: this has the effect where the space panel on the non-authoritative client will jump around as it /syncs many account data events in batches

Reviewer: is this any different than room tagging currently?

Reviewer 4: If the rooms are updated in order, no jumping should be observed.
(Unless the the re-ordering client decides to update account data concurrently)

Reviewer 3: Even without concurrency, you can't guarantee it won't get batched in the /sync in the wrong order, so all clients would have to transactionally update all local state that came in within that sync which is not how a lot function and you might see the latter update being applied before the former one.

Reviewer 4: Ah, fair enough. Could still sort the batch but not worth the complexity.

# MSC3230: User defined top level spaces ordering

Currently, Spaces as defined per [MSC1772](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772)
do not define an explicit order for top level spaces. Current implementations are ordering based
on the lexicographic order of the roomIds.

As requested by a lot of users, it would be very convenient to be able to re-order top level spaces.

The ordering is per user and should be persisted and synced across the user's devices.

This MSC only concerns top level space ordering as subspace ordering is defined in the space as per m.space.child event.

## Proposal

> The ordering information should be stored using room [`account_data`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#id125)

Author: fixed

Order is saved by using a new room account data of type `m.space_order`

` PUT /_matrix/client/r0/user/{userId}/rooms/{roomId}/account_data/m.space_order`

````
{
    "type": "m.space_order",
    "content": {
        "order": "..."
    }
}
````

Where `order` is a string that will be compared using lexicographic order. Spaces with no order should appear last and be ordered using the roomID.

> Order is defined as a `string` and not a `float` as in room tags, as recommanded because it was not very successful.

Author: thx

## Future considerations

__Space Pinning__: The room `m.space_order` content could be extended by adding categories like `pinned`

__Space Folder__: In order to save vertical space, content could be extended to define folders and space with same folder could be represented as a single entry in the space pannel. On tap would expand the pannel.

## Alternatives

__Global Scope Account Data__

It's not clear whether this setting should be using global vs room scope.

Order could be stored in a global scope account as an array of roomID in the `org.matrix.mscXXX.space.order` type.
````
{
  "type": "org.matrix.mscXXX.space.order",
  "content": {
    "order": [
      "!GDoOXUnhorabeOhHur:matrix.org",
      "!ERioTVWSdvArJzumhm:foo.bar",
      "!AZozoWghOYSIAzerOIf:example.org",
      "!uZvykTONFkrkzGUFVE:mozilla.org",
      "!TfGEAMfGlIFILPqKYwQ:matrix.org",
      "!TaFfBCfZQRjDkrTvbDb:matrix.org"
    ]
  }
}
````

This alternative has been discarded as it won't scale, could reach event content size limit, and is less flexible as a way to define order compared to [0,1].

__Room Tags__

> Order is stored using existing [Room Tagging](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#room-tagging) mecanism.

Reviewer: please don't use `latest` links

Reviewer: and spelling on "mechanism"

> > The tags on a room are received as single m.tag event in the account_data section of a room. The content of the m.tag event is a tags key whose value is an object mapping the name of each tag to another object.

Reviewer: line wrap

> 
> The JSON object associated with each tag gives information about the tag, e.g how to order the rooms with a given tag.

````
{
    "content": {
        "tags": {
            "m.space": {
                "order": 0.9
            }
        }
    },
    "type": "m.tag"
}
````

> As defined per `room tagging`ordering information is given under the order key as a number between 0 and 1. The numbers are compared such that 0 is displayed first. Therefore a room with an order of 0.2 would be displayed before a room with an order of 0.7. If a room has a tag without an order key then it should appear after the rooms with that tag that have an order key, fallbacking then to roomID lexical order.

Reviewer: line wrap and adding a few spaces please.

> This alternative has been discarded becaused perceived as confusing in regards of tags intentions.

Reviewer: confusing how? It seems like a natural fit for reusing existing structures in Matrix, which is ideal.

Reviewer 4: It's also much easier to work with than lexicographical strings.

Author: Caused infinite problems when we first did it due to truncation and rounding and ieee representation quirks

Author: > @turt2live looks like this has an implementation [vector-im/element-android#3502](https://github.com/vector-im/element-android/pull/3502)

Also in web https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-react-sdk/commit/21fc386317d8bc41f5bdbf416c17263a4f7e055d

Reviewer 5: Also the spec explicitly calls out tags without a u prefix as reserved for application internal uses, which in this case the tag would be used for ordering spaces instead of as a tag.

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer: duplicate

> ## Privacy considerations

Reviewer: remove unused sections

# MSC3230: User defined top level spaces ordering

Currently, Spaces as defined per [MSC1772](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772)
do not define an explicit order for top level spaces. Current implementations are ordering based
on the lexicographic order of the roomIds.

As requested by a lot of users, it would be very convenient to be able to re-order top level spaces.

The ordering is per user and should be persisted and synced across the user's devices.

This MSC only concerns top level space ordering as subspace ordering is defined in the space
as per m.space.child event.

## Proposal

The ordering information should be stored using room [`account_data`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#id125)

Order is saved by using a new room account data of type `m.space_order`

` PUT /_matrix/client/r0/user/{userId}/rooms/{roomId}/account_data/m.space_order`

````
{
    "type": "m.space_order",
    "content": {
        "order": "..."
    }
}
````

Where `order` is a string that will be compared using lexicographic order. Spaces with
no order should appear last and be ordered using the roomID.

> `orders` which are not strings, or do not consist solely of ascii characters in the range \x20 (space) to \x7E (~),

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`order` fields which are not strings, or do not consist solely of ascii characters in the range \x20 (space) to \x7E (~),
```

or consist of more than 50 characters, are forbidden and the field should be ignored if received.)

Order is defined as a `string` and not a `float` as in room tags, as recommended because it was
not very successful (Caused infinite problems when we first did it due to truncation and rounding
and ieee representation quirks).

__Recommended algorithm to compute mid points:__

In order to find mid points between two orders strings, the `order` string can be considered as
a base N number where N is the length of the allowed alphabet. So the string can be converted

> to a base 10 number for computation and mid point computation, then converted back to base N.

Reviewer 4: I don't think this algorithm works well enough to go into the spec as a recommended algorithm.

First issue is for an alphabet "A-Z" it considers `"B"` and `"BA"` to be the same thing, which they're not. Collisions would become an issue.
```
For A..B and limit 4
     0
A    8
AA   12
AAA  14
AAAA 15
AAAB 16
AAB  16
AABA 17
AABB 18
AB   16
ABA  18
ABAA 19
ABAB 20
ABB  20
ABBA 21
ABBB 22
B    16
BA   20
BAA  22
BAAA 23
BAAB 24
BAB  24
BABA 25
BABB 26
BB   24
BBA  26
BBAA 27
BBAB 28
BBB  28
BBBA 29
BBBB 30
```

One could fix this by treating the string as a base N + 1 and padding the end of the string with the new character.
But you get gaps in that case.
```
For A..B and limit 4
     0
A    27
AA   36
AAA  39
AAAA 40
AAAB 41
AAB  42
AABA 43
AABB 44
AB   45
ABA  48
ABAA 49
ABAB 50
ABB  51
ABBA 52
ABBB 53
B    54
BA   63
BAA  66
BAAA 67
BAAB 68
BAB  69
BABA 70
BABB 71
BB   72
BBA  75
BBAA 76
BBAB 77
BBB  78
BBBA 79
BBBB 80
```

Reviewer 4: Ah, I just noticed that the example also highlights this.
```
"a" = 65*(95^0) 
"z" = 90*(95^0) 
"az" = 65*(95^1) + 90*(95^0) 
```

Simplified, the calculated values are.
```
"a" = 65
"z" = 90
"az" = 6265
```

Sorting them lexicographically, "az" is between "a" and "z", but the numbers don't reflect this.
Worse yet, the number of possible strings between "a" and "z" should be massive! Much bigger than 2^32.
But this algo says the available strings is "90 - 65", which is just 25.

Author: The issue is that we need a representation that allows to easily compute midpoints / interval in between to orders.
Nonetheless it's true that string to base representation is not respecting lexicographic order (as we are padding strings to be same length).
I might update MSC to reflect the need for padding or state to use stringToBase to compare

````
"a" = 65*(95^0) 
"z" = 90*(95^0) 
"az" = 65*(95^1) + 90*(95^0) 
````

In order to find mid points between strings of different sizes, the shortest string should be padded
with the first character of alphabet \x20 (space).

## Client recommendations:

After moving a space (e.g via DnD), client should limit the number of room account data update.
For example if the space is moved between two other spaces with orders, just update the moved space order by
computing a mid point between the surrounding orders.

If the space is moved after a space with no order, all the previous spaces should be then ordered,
and the computed orders should be choosen so that there is enough gaps in between them to facilitate future
re-order.

Re numbering (i.e change all spaces `m.space.order` account data) should be avoided as much as possible,
as the updates might not be atomic for other clients and would makes spaces jump around.

## Potential issues

Spreading the order information across all spaces account data is making order changes not atomic.

Order string could grow infinitly and reach a hard limit, it might be needed to re-number
when order string are too big.

## Future considerations

> __Space Pinning__: The room `m.space_order` content could be extended by adding categories like `pinned`.

Reviewer 6: Is this about pinning non-top level spaces?

__Space Folder__: In order to save vertical space, content could be extended to define folders
and space with same folder could be represented as a single entry in the space pannel.

> On tap would expand the pannel.

Reviewer 6: if defining folders and spaces with same `folder` key as folder id will be represented as single entry, how the folder entry will be ordered around other top-level spaces or folders? does folder key is also a lexicographical order key?

## Alternatives

> 

Reviewer 5: Not that I think it is a particularly good idea, but one could also create a private, invisible top level space, that orders its children by the normal rules. Only difference would be that that top level space is not shown in clients and is only used for ordering.

__Global Scope Account Data__

It's not clear whether this setting should be using global vs room scope.

Order could be stored in a global scope account as an array of roomID in the `org.matrix.mscXXX.space.order` type.
````
{
  "type": "org.matrix.mscXXX.space.order",
  "content": {
    "order": [
      "!GDoOXUnhorabeOhHur:matrix.org",
      "!ERioTVWSdvArJzumhm:foo.bar",
      "!AZozoWghOYSIAzerOIf:example.org",
      "!uZvykTONFkrkzGUFVE:mozilla.org",
      "!TfGEAMfGlIFILPqKYwQ:matrix.org",
      "!TaFfBCfZQRjDkrTvbDb:matrix.org"
    ]
  }
}
````

This alternative has been discarded as it won't scale, could reach event content size limit, and is

> less flexible as a way to define order compared to [0,1].

Reviewer 5: There is no size limit for account data events (otherwise m.direct would break). A bigger concern is that clients often break the m.direct event when updating the list in it, because it is racy, which would apply here too, but I very much doubt users will be in so many top level spaces, that this will ever matter here.

> less flexible as a way to define order compared to [0,1].

Reviewer 7: Having just implemented this on the Rust SDK side I can't help but think that this alternative is actually the superior solution:
* it doesn't spread the data to multiple places, making reading and writing it partially fallible and resulting in undefined ordering
* it gets rid of multi-request sorting and batched client updates
* it doesn't need a complicated mid points algorithm which will most likely result in clients having to bring in a new dependency or having differences in implementations between them
* and most importantly it's generally simple to understand, implement and test/verify.

Otherwise, as @deepbluev7 pointed above, there isn't a limit for account data so basically no downsides. 

Even if there were limits, we use lists of identifiers in other places like `im.vector.setting.breadcrumbs` which always stores 20. I would argue that expecting the user to order and remember the order for more than 20 rooms is unreasonable and that that point introducing alphabetical sorting is probably more useful.

__Room Tags__

Order is stored using existing [Room Tagging](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#room-tagging)
mechanism.

> The tags on a room are received as single m.tag event in the account_data section of a room.
The content of the m.tag event is a tags key whose value is an object mapping the name of each tag
to another object.
> 
> The JSON object associated with each tag gives information about the tag, e.g how to order
the rooms with a given tag.

````
{
    "content": {
        "tags": {
            "m.space": {
                "order": 0.9
            }
        }
    },
    "type": "m.tag"
}
````

As defined per `room tagging`ordering information is given under the order key as a number between 0 and 1.
The numbers are compared such that 0 is displayed first. Therefore a room with an order of 0.2 would
be displayed before a room with an order of 0.7. If a room has a tag without an order key then it
should appear after the rooms with that tag that have an order key, fallbacking then to roomID lexical order.

This alternative has been discarded becaused perceived as confusing in regards of tags intentions.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

## Alternatives

Have space child room pointers in MSC1769 profile rooms, hence have the ordering per-profile,
 rather than per-account.

```

# MSC3230: User defined top level spaces ordering

Currently, Spaces as defined per [MSC1772](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772) do not define an explicit order for top level spaces. Current implementations are ordering based on the lexicographic order of the roomIds.

As requested by a lot of users, it would be very convenient to be able to re-order top level spaces.

The ordering is per user and should be persisted and synced across the user's devices.

This MSC only concerns top level space ordering as subspace ordering is defined in the space as per m.space.child event.

## Proposal

The ordering information should be stored using room [`account_data`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#id125)

> Order is stored using existing [Room Tagging](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#room-tagging) mecanism.

Reviewer 8: using `m.tag` feels confusing to me - tags and spaces are different, so treating "space" as a special tag feels wrong. I'd use a different account data type:

```json
{
    "type": "m.space_order",
    "content": {
        "order": "..."
    }
}
```

Author: Updated msc to use a dedicated room account data. This solution has been moved to alternatives

> The tags on a room are received as single m.tag event in the account_data section of a room. The content of the m.tag event is a tags key whose value is an object mapping the name of each tag to another object.
> 
> The JSON object associated with each tag gives information about the tag, e.g how to order the rooms with a given tag.

````
{
    "content": {
        "tags": {
            "m.space": {

>                 "order": 0.9

Reviewer 8: I'd avoid using a float here if possible, for the same reasons as it didn't work for the existing tags

Author: Updated, the choosen solution now use a `string`order
